---
title: Tor
---
## From the Dark Web to the Future of Privacy

*by Ben Collier*

[[*Texts*](/texts)]

> Tor has survived for more than twenty years in a rather shaky relationship with the US government, supporting American global soft power by changing the online rules of the game in authoritarian nations, allowing the public to access Western news and social media and helping antigovernment activists there to communicate securely.

...

> People often think that the internet is flat—that once you get past the ISP, the entire thing opens up like the Matrix, a vast hyperspace. But a lot of work goes into maintaining this illusion—in reality, the internet has a geography all of its own. The ISP takes a user’s signals and routes these up to a bigger network of networks, a large area of internet routing infrastructure called an AS, or Autonomous System, of which there are around 37,000 in the world. These ASes form a landscape of their own, linking the physical servers of the internet backbone together into their own constantly shifting digital geography. The ASes build links with one another via a range of arcane processes conducted in their own language, called BGP, or Border Gateway Protocol, which allows them to see what the day-to-day landscape of the internet looks like, and to identify how to get signals to their eventual destination, between the respective sectors of the internet that they each manage.
> 
> ISPs, ASes, and other actors involved in internet administration exert an enormous influence on the macro-scale flows of data around the world. Although our young internet user might be accessing the New York Times, whose home servers are in the United States, the ISP won’t even bother sending her requests to see the newspaper’s home page all the way there. Even at the speed of light, that would take too long. Instead, most of her communication is with much closer hubs, called the edge network, that periodically download copies of big chunks of the internet.
> 
> Far from a “neutral” internet, the ISP bandwidth used by her and other people trying to reach commonly browsed websites like the New York Times is far greater than that for people trying to reach small, seldom-visited paths on the internet, such as self-hosted cooking blogs. This physical geography of the internet is much more managed, complex, and hierarchical than the myth of the flat, densely interconnected network would suggest, and it creates data bottlenecks all over the place. From the undersea cables transmitting data between continents, to the networks of links between the ASes and the data centers and local networks we rely on, the internet is full of places where governments, spy agencies, and even infrastructure companies can get a pretty good picture of what’s going on with a handy snooping device or wiretap.

...

> Privacy is a foundational concept in human societies. It demarcates different kinds of spaces, activities, and ideas, within which different systems and structures of power operate. It is thus particularly important to liberal conceptions of democracy, in which it is understood as one of the central values underpinning democratic social life. In the classic liberal view, privacy represents restrictions on state power, keeping it away from spaces in which commerce, politics, and individuality can germinate and be allowed to flourish independently.10
> 
> Thus is born the private business, the private home, and finally, the private political, emotional, and mental space of the individual. This is often framed as the “right to be let alone” by the state or the press.11 In more mundane contexts, it can also be the right to be let alone by your neighbors, by your family, or by your partner.
> 
> On one level, privacy is—and always has been—about control over the flow of information. This is especially true in today’s world, in which information technologies support so much of social life. We largely assess privacy by asking who has control over what information: Who knows what websites you’re visiting? Who can see you going to the toilet? Who has access to your medical history?
> 
> But privacy isn’t about information alone, and this becomes clear when it’s broken. Underneath the ideologies and political arguments around privacy is a terrain of deep emotional reactions. Breaches of privacy, even relatively minor ones, are often accompanied by a deep sense of shame and embarrassment. Norbert Elias deals explicitly with privacy in his accounts of what he called the civilizing process—the increasing separation of different areas of life in modern societies, each with its own particular customs and norms, and increasingly complex divisions of power and protocol within them. Privacy is, in practice, a very broad concept that bounds up the customs, values, and technologies that we use to demarcate and mediate these spaces of power.

...

> So when you try to create a particular kind of privacy in a certain situation, you also step into a broader culture and its structures of power. This cultural richness seems at first irreconcilable from the technical ideas of privacy rendered in the design of signaling systems or databases, expressed in math and code. But in reality, they are inexorably linked. Privacy scholar and information scientist Helen Nissenbaum proposed a radical way of thinking about digital privacy that includes these ideas of related culture and values, but also provides a useful set of tools for practical work with computer systems.17 Nissenbaum argues that privacy is produced in context and that the norms associated with those contexts should travel with it. She calls this “contextual integrity.” So when the data captured in your doctor’s office travels around, it should carry with it the norms and values of the doctor’s office.

network power

> Network forms of power are hard and angular; there is little room for interpretation in the cold lines of a network diagram. They lead to a kind of structural determinism—the idea that to change society, all you need to do is reshape the network. In a similar mode, the work of technology studies scholars Laura DeNardis and Francesca Musiani on digital infrastructure identifies power through the concentrations of lines in the network map, as the places where human and technical connections meet and the waypoints through which people, data, information, and money are forced to pass.21 These control points can be thought of as the clusters on a network diagram where all the lines come together at a single node. If you want to get something done, you need to pass through them, and if you can get control of one of these nodes, you can exert a great deal of power.
> 
> Despite its utopian visions of a “flat” hyperspace, as we saw above, the internet infrastructure is full of these nodes or control points. For example, if you want a high-speed connection to the United States from Europe, your traffic will need to pass through the undersea fiber-optic cables that connect the two continents. This is a material aspect of the internet as a network.
> 
> If you could put a pair of high tech crocodile clips on these cables, you could exert an immense amount of power by, for example, reading and surveilling huge swaths of data about people’s intimate lives.22 So here, privacy might be a case not only of who gets to see your data but also of these clusters of control in the networks of digital technologies we use day-to-day.
> 
> Other kinds of network hierarchy are important too, beyond just the topology of the infrastructure. For example, we might represent the control that developers wield over the design of the technology—and thus the ability to change the code and force people to use it—as a particularly concentrated network of power. One step further up the chain, the CEOs and policymakers that tell these engineers what to do might represent another kind of network again. In contemporary digital societies, we move through these complex and contingent networks all the time, with people budding off and rejoining different systems of power as they engage with different parts of the digital infrastructure.

...

> Bringing this all together, we arrive at a useful way of thinking about privacy and digital infrastructure: as something to be actively produced and maintained, both through continuous human work and social practices and through technologies, infrastructure, and designed spaces. The kinds of privacy we find in a doctor’s office, in a lawyer’s privileged phone call, in a confession booth, or in the bedroom are bound up with the social worlds of the people who make and inhabit these spaces.24 The privacy experienced in each of these spaces derives from the values, practices, and technologies that support them.
> 
> The social world of the doctor, for example, draws on the long history of the profession; the cultures, knowledge, and practices internalized over years of training and work; the design of the hospital and the clinic; their legal and regulatory environment; and the wide array of different technologies used, from stethoscopes to scalpels. Within this world is a particular interpretation of privacy and a series of practices used to create it. In the case of the doctor, privacy can be found in the protection of patient records, in drawing a curtain around a hospital bed, and in the sacrosanct confines of a doctor’s office.
> 
> The doctor alone doesn’t create that privacy, however. They usually don’t have the coding skills to make a secure patient records program, or the architectural know-how to build a hospital. Privacy exists at the intersection of the worlds of the patient and the doctor in the moment of the consultation but also the worlds of the architect who designed the surgery, the computer engineer who designed the patient notes program, and the administrator who manages the databases behind the scenes. Each of these deep cultures contain different ideas and conceptions of privacy, and each plays a unique role in creating the privacy that you actually experience as the patient. Taking the architect as an example, a consultation room with glass windows or an open-plan design might mean something rather different in terms of the privacy you experience.
> 
> This gives us a concept from which to write a biography of the Tor network: the concept of the privacy world. The first component of a privacy world is its ideas, values, and visions of what privacy means. Our teenager might see privacy mostly in terms of keeping her life hidden from her parents; our drug dealer might see it in terms of securing themselves against the police; and the system administrator might see privacy in terms of databases and records. These ideas are linked to the second component of a privacy world: the practices through which these people actually try to create privacy. For example, the drug dealers looking for privacy in the cryptomarkets might use fake names and package their products up in DVD cases, all while relying on the relay operators maintaining the nodes in the Tor network and the designers of Tor fixing bugs in the code. All of these practices need to work in conjunction to successfully realize the drug dealer’s vision of a private space to trade Bitcoin for heroin, even if they would be unlikely to share the values or culture with the technical workers behind the scenes of Tor.
> 
> The third, and final, component is the material technologies and infrastructures around which these privacy worlds cluster. These infrastructures—such as Tor, or the internet itself—form bridges between worlds, linking up the drug dealers with the privacy activists, the spies and the freedom fighters, the security consultants and the cryptographers. The digital infrastructures around which we build privacy worlds are themselves packed tightly with ideas about privacy, written into the code and protocols and realized in their technical design.
> 
> This last part—the infrastructure—is crucial. The advent of the digital age has meant that there are now many new worlds that delineate the boundaries between spaces of power in social life. In previous centuries, a similar position might have been held by architects, lawyers, or even police or spies. But now (in addition to these), the worlds of people who work with digital and networked technologies have come to the fore as some of the most influential in our societies. Across the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, this new class of tech workers has risen to power with its own very strong ideas about privacy. From the early military-academic researchers who first laid the foundations of the internet, through the boom of the World Wide Web in the ’90s, to the social media princelings, the privacy values embedded in the internet have been shaped by the ideas of successive generations of people in charge of the infrastructure.25 More recently, the world of the “crypto bros” has tried to sell its own vision of a hyperfinancialized future. Here we can see the power of some of these worlds—the obscure ideas and values of tech workers in San Francisco being shipped around the planet in the form of new digital infrastructures.26
> 
> Most of the stories that have been told about Tor to date have been histories of particularly compelling or unpleasant groups of users and the worlds in which they live—drug dealers on cryptomarkets, terrorists and pedophiles, freedom fighters, exiles, and hackers. Underlying all of these, however, are privacy worlds that have not been explored: those constructed by the people on whom the Tor network itself relies, including its builders, maintainers, and advocates.
> 
> In writing this book, I interviewed more than thirty of Tor’s core community members: its developers, the people who maintain the network, and the advocates who promote it around the world. I also spent several years at hacker conferences talking to the wider Tor community, and analyzed thousands of pages of emails, financial reports, code commits, design documents, and blog posts from Tor’s vast online archives. Throughout this book, I illustrate Tor’s biography with quotes from these interviews—mostly conducted between 2016 and 2022—and from more than privacy means. Our teenager might see privacy mostly in terms of keeping her life hidden from her parents; our drug dealer might see it in terms of securing themselves against the police; and the system administrator might see privacy in terms of databases and records. These ideas are linked to the second component of a privacy world: the practices through which these people actually try to create privacy. For example, the drug dealers looking for privacy in the cryptomarkets might use fake names and package their products up in DVD cases, all while relying on the relay operators maintaining the nodes in the Tor network and the designers of Tor fixing bugs in the code. All of these practices need to work in conjunction to successfully realize the drug dealer’s vision of a private space to trade Bitcoin for heroin, even if they would be unlikely to share the values or culture with the technical workers behind the scenes of Tor.
> 
> The third, and final, component is the material technologies and infrastructures around which these privacy worlds cluster. These infrastructures—such as Tor, or the internet itself—form bridges between worlds, linking up the drug dealers with the privacy activists, the spies and the freedom fighters, the security consultants and the cryptographers. The digital infrastructures around which we build privacy worlds are themselves packed tightly with ideas about privacy, written into the code and protocols and realized in their technical design.
> 
> This last part—the infrastructure—is crucial. The advent of the digital age has meant that there are now many new worlds that delineate the boundaries between spaces of power in social life. In previous centuries, a similar position might have been held by architects, lawyers, or even police or spies. But now (in addition to these), the worlds of people who work with digital and networked technologies have come to the fore as some of the most influential in our societies. Across the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, this new class of tech workers has risen to power with its own very strong ideas about privacy. From the early military-academic researchers who first laid the foundations of the internet, through the boom of the World Wide Web in the ’90s, to the social media princelings, the privacy values embedded in the internet have been shaped by the ideas of successive generations of people in charge of the infrastructure.25 More recently, the world of the “crypto bros” has tried to sell its own vision of a hyperfinancialized future. Here we can see the power of some of these worlds—the obscure ideas and values of tech workers in San Francisco being shipped around the planet in the form of new digital infrastructures.26

...

> The first of these, crypto-freedom, is particularly important for this history, as its ideas would eventually form a core part of Tor’s development and reason for existence. The crypto-freedom culture derives from the computer scientists and cryptographers who were developing the encryption technologies that grew up alongside the internet. Cryptography and codebreaking had historically been technologies of the state, but a new generation of academics, engineers, and researchers had begun to imbue them with a newly anti-authoritarian, utopian character. The ease with which new digital technologies could be created and distributed meant that those new technologies could far more easily be put in the hands of the people, and thus exist for the benefit of the public, not just the elite. One researcher in particular, David Chaum, the “godfather of the crypto movement,” spent the late 1970s and much of the 1980s laying the foundations for many of the technologies circulating today, with early designs for digital cash and cryptocurrencies, electronic voting systems, anonymity networks (called mixnets) and several core cryptographic tools of the digital age.
> 
> For the self-named cypherpunks involved in this work, encryption technologies took on an explicitly political character: they could have a powerful impact beyond military use by underwriting a libertarian conception of privacy and autonomy of the individual, protecting the internet as a space for freedom and information, commerce and community.12 This commitment to action (rather than political wrangling) was summarized in the motto: “cypherpunks write code.” While they shared a utopian view of the internet with other hacker sensibilities, they believed that maintaining that utopia would require robust technical mechanisms for ensuring privacy, lest the internet become a dystopian tool of repressive control and surveillance. To the cypherpunks, this vision could be realized by the math of cryptosystems, formal proofs that could quantify in hard numbers the privacy properties of the systems they were building.13

...

> Following Operation Desert Storm, the US military’s ground invasion of Iraq in 1991, a (possibly real, possibly apocryphal) story began circulating on late-night talk shows. As the story went, a journalist had noticed a massive spike in pizza deliveries to the headquarters of the US Department of Defense in the Pentagon building the night before the unannounced invasion. From this, the journalist deduced that there were hundreds of Pentagon employees working late, and hence, that the invasion must be imminent.
> 
> To the NRL researchers, this provided a compelling example of how revealing metadata alone can be.
> 
> > And so we said—no one’s doing this now, but imagine if in the future, you could order a pizza over the web! We said, an adversary could just, you know, watch the orders come into the local Pizza Hut or Dominos, and they wouldn’t have to hang around outside the Pentagon, they could just watch the network.
> 
> > Tor developer

THIS IS WHY THE MILITARY DOESN'T RUN TOR

> This technical design has immediate social consequences, which were apparent to the NRL designers from the early stages. First, the infrastructure could not be run by the US Navy, for if this were the case, then only people who trusted the US Navy would use it. In an onion routing design, anonymity is produced by the size of the crowd—the more people using the system, the more privacy it provides.
> 
> > But if we’re the only ones running the system, then the only people you’re going to get is the people who are inclined to trust us … So, you need to let mutually mistrusting people run different parts of the infrastructure. And that also underscores its security, because if they’re running it, and it’s run by different entities, which are perhaps, you know, might be reputable, but are still not ones that you would expect to fully co-operate if somebody wanted to pull this apart.
> 
> > Tor core developer

> There are other implications, as well. For a CIA agent to use Tor without suspicion in non-US nations, for example, there would need to be plenty of citizens in these nations using Tor for everyday internet browsing. Similarly, if the only users in a particular country are whistleblowers, civil rights activists and protesters, the government may well simply arrest anyone connecting to your anonymity network. As a result, an onion routing system had to be open to as wide a range of users and maintainers as possible, so that the mere fact that someone was using the system wouldn’t reveal anything about their identity or their affiliations.
> 
> This philosophy, of a system open to the general public, in which small numbers of high-risk users could hide in cover traffic from more everyday users, underpins what became the onion routing paradigm, the predecessor to Tor.
> 
> > When I first said it, I thought I was being facetious, but in hindsight I think it was a reasonable thing … Well, you know, the technology’s cool and it’s nice to make something that’s actually going to be useful and help people. But one of the really nice things about it is that you build something which by its very nature takes people who think they ought not to trust each other and work together at all, and forces them to collaborate in order to get the results that you want. And I just like the idea that you are forcing people who thought that they should never work with these people to do so.
> 
> > Tor developer
